near final-draft edits of Zed spec (#3319)
brimdata/zed: docs/formats/zed-data-model.md

# The Zed Data Model

## 1. Introduction

Zed offers a new and improved way to think about and manage data.

Modern data models are typically described in terms of their _structured-ness_:
* _tabular-structured_, often simply called _"structured"_,

> where a specific schema is defined to describe a table and values are enumerated that conform to that schema;

Author: It's not so simple.  CSV is not generally considered "structured" and I'd like to avoid that rat hole.

* _semi-structured_, where arbitrarily complex, hierarchical data structures
define the data and values do not fit neatly into tables, e.g., JSON and XML; and
* _unstructured_, where arbitrary text is formatted in accordance with
external, often vague, rules for its interpretation.

CSV is arguably the simplest but most frustrating format that follows the tabular-structured
pattern.  It provides a bare bones schema consisting of the names of the columns as the
first line of a file followed by a list of comma-separated, textual values

> that must be parsed and inferred for their type.  The lack of a universally adopted

Author: The old neuter whose.

Instead of defining a single, composite schema to
which all values must conform, the Zed type system allows values to freely
express each of their types in accordance with the type system.

In this approach,
Zed is neither tabular nor semi-structured.  Zed is "super-structured".

In particular, the Zed "record type" looks like a schema but when
serializing Zed data, the model is very different.  A Zed sequence is not
comprised of a record-type declaration followed by a sequence of
homogeneously-typed record values, but instead,
is a sequence of arbitrarily typed Zed values, which may or may not all
be records.

Yet when a sequence of Zed values _in fact conforms to a uniform record type_,
then such a collection of Zed records looks precisely like a relational table.
Here, the record type
of such a collection corresponds to a well-defined schema consisting
of field names (i.e, column names) where each field has a specific Zed type.
Zed also has named types, so by simply naming a particular record type
(i.e., a schema), a relational table can be projected from a pool of Zed data
with a simple type query for that named type.

> But unlike traditional relational tables, these Zed-constructed tables can have arbitrary

Author: yes, I'll make an issue because it doesn't impact the format

structure in each column as Zed recursive types allows the field of a record
to have an arbitrary type.  This is very different compared to the hybrid pattern:
all Zed data at all levels conforms to the same data model.  Here, both the
tabular-structured and semi-structured patterns are representable in a single model.
Unlike the hybrid pattern, systems based on Zed have

> no need to simultaneously support two very different data-model patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
no need to simultaneously support two very different data models.
```

In other words, Zed unifies the relational data model of SQL tables

> with the document model of JSON with a _super-structured_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the document model of JSON into a _super-structured_
```

design pattern enabled by the Zed type system.
An explicit, uniquely-defined type of each value precisely
defines its entire structure, i.e., its superstructure.  There is
no need to traverse each hierarchical value --- as with JSON, BSON, or Ion ---
to discover each value's structure.

And because Zed derives it design from the vast landscape
of existing formats and data models, it was deliberately designed to be
a superset of --- and thus interoperable with --- a broad range of formats
including JSON, BSON, Ion, Avro, Parquet, CSV, JSON Schema, and XML.

> As an example, most systems that are based on a semi-structured data would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, most systems that are based on semi-structured data would
```

say the JSON value
```
{"a":[1,"foo"]}
```

> would be of type object and the value of key `a` would be type array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is of type object and the value of key `a` is type array.
```

In Zed, however, this value's type is type `record` with field `a`

> of type `array` of type `union` of `int64` and `string`, or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of type `array` of type `union` of `int64` and `string`,
```

expressed succinctly in ZSON as
```
{a:[(int64,string)]}
```
This is superstructuredness in a nutshell.

### 2.1 Zed and Schemas

While the Zed data model removes the schema constraint,
the implication here is not that schemas are unimportant;
to the contrary, schemas are foundational.  Schemas not only define agreement
and semantics between communicating entities, but also serve as the cornerstone
for organizing and modeling data for data engineering and business intelligence.

That said, schemas often create complexity in system designs
where components might simply want to store and communicate data in some
meaningful way.  For example, an ETL pipeline should not break when upstream

> structural changes cause data to no longer fit in downstream relational tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
structural changes prevent data from fitting into downstream relational tables.
```

> Instead, the data stream should continue to operate and land
> on the target system without having to fit into a pre-defined table,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, the pipeline should continue to operate and the data should continue to land
on the target system without having to fit into a predefined table,
```
